---
title: Hard in a different way
description: Some thoughts on what makes life "hard" these days.
pubDate: 2023-11-21T19:01:40Z
author: tjex
tags: ["society", "psychology"]
license: cc
draft: true
---

I don't think it an unusual topic between children and parents, how life has
changed in the span of a generation. And an interesting candidate for comparring
the two time frames is what makes life "hard" now, and what made life "hard"
back then.

I write "hard" in quotation marks, as the kind of hard I'm referring to here is
not in any way appropriate when considering the death, destruction and chaos
that is enveloping Ukraine and Gaza right now.

It's the kind of "hard" we think about when considering the requirements of day
to day life. For context, this blog post is almost an unedited response to an
email on the same topic with my mum. She'd mentioned that back when she was
younger, she walked kilometers to work because she couldn't afford the tram
fare, and that they used milk crates to sit out the back in the garden instead
of buying chairs. At the time (and still to this day) she lived in Australia,
where the cost of living has for the most part been quite affordable. She was
also not destitute, working part / full time since the age of 16.

For the average Australian today, that kind of expenditure (a tram ticket) more
or less goes without saying. It's not a luxury in place of walking kilometers to
work.

...

I think in the present, we have so much access to information, knowledge,
technology, mobility, luxuries, services, etc. For the most part they're quite
affordable too (or free). As my mum had said, she'd sat on milk crates out the
back; now everyone can fully furnish their house from Ikea as a 'cheap' option.
Despite the wealth divide growing, real poverty is still at an all time low and
our general standard of living has increased markedly as time moves on (a lot to
do with the cost of manufacturing and technolgical innovation).

But all the technology, access, mobility has totally abstracted us from our
present moment and as a result abstracted us from who we are, where we are, and
what we have. It makes questions of why we may want to be someone else (e.g. a
better self), go somewhere else or have something else much harder to quantify.
Put otherwise, if so much is easily accessible and without much cost, it reduces
the internal value we hold for it.

I would say this is a good reason why those who chase money never feel
fulfilled. Wealth increases access, that's the value of wealth. But if you value
the money over the access, you will never feel fulfilled. Because on its own,
money is nothing. It's the thing that you exchange for the money that holds the
value.

So in todays age, all the access to being someone else, being somewhere else and
having something else, simply creates a "paradox of choice" situation; where you
have too much choice and because of it you never feel content with the decision
made.

Technology is also a good reason why each individual person might not
"naturally" find their way out of the predicament. Because technology (computers
in specific), withold the same paradigm; they create even MORE access and alow
us to get things done with even less foundational knowledge of a subject (which
AI is now supercharging), to the point where you can "accomplish" a goal, be it
large or small, without any real sense of accomplishment.

All in all, in the modern day, we move through our daily lives so incredibly
abstracted from the difficulties of the underlying process. e.g. Walking km's to
work versus ordering an uber via the supercomputer in your pocket, moving
overseas and needing to send letters or budget for phone calls versus video
chatting whenever at no extra cost and writing a thesis with libraries and
expensive books as resources versus almost all documented work in human history
available immediately through the internet.

It's a life lived on an abstracted level, where we end up somewhere without
really knowing how we got there. I think that's also what contributes to the
feeling of the world moving "so fast". It has a lot to do with being distracted
by all the access we have, battling the "paradox of choice" within so many
facets of our lives. Social media is great for this. By the time we've gotten
through the current set of choices, the world has shifted once again under our
feet and no one really has a good understanding of how or why.

Nature is ever moving and evolving, it doesn't stop and wait for our distracted
selves to focus in again.
