---
title: First 10 Day Vipassana Course
description: A few thoughts after my first 10 day silent meditation course in the technique of Vipassana and a consolidation of its philosophies. 
pubDate: 2023-06-26T18:51:08Z 
author: tjex
tags: ['meditation', 'philosophy']
draft: true
---

It's an interesting point about what makes life "hard" now and what made
life "hard" back then. 

I think in the present, we have so much access to information,
knowledge, technology, mobility, luxuries, services, etc. For the most
part they're quite affordable too (or free). As you said, you sat on
milk crates in your apartments, now everyone can fully furnish their
house from Ikea as a 'cheap' option. Despite the wealth divide growing, 
real poverty is still at an all time low and our general standard of
living has increased markedly as time moves on (a lot to do with the
cost of manufacturing and technolgical innovation).

The cost of dads first computer relative to the minimum wage back then,
would probably, for the sake of making a point, mean in today's rates
you could by a quantum computer on today's minimum wage.

But all the technology, access, mobility has totally abstracted us from
our present moment and as a result abstracted us from who we are, where
we are, and what we have. It makes questions of why we may want to be
someone else (e.g. a better self), go somewhere else or have something
else much harder to quantify. Put otherwise, if so much is easily
accessible and without much cost, it reduces the internal value we hold
for it. 

I would say this is a good reason why those who chase money never feel
fulfilled. Wealth increases access, that's the value of wealth. But if you value
the money over the access, you will never feel fulfilled. Because on its
own, money is nothing. It's the thing that you exchange for the money
that holds the value. 

So in todays age, all the access to being someone else, being somewhere
else and having something else, simply creates a "paradox of choice"
situation; where you have too much choice and because of it you never
feel content with the decision made.

Technology is also a good reason why each individual person
might not "naturally" find their way out of the predicament. Because
technology (computers in specific), withold the same paradigm; they
create even MORE access and alow us to get things done with even less
foundational knowledge of a subject (which AI is now supercharging), to
the point where you can "accomplish" a goal, be it large or small,
without any real sense of accomplishment. 

All in all, in the modern day, we move through our daily lives so
incredibly abstracted from the difficulties of the underlying process.
e.g. Walking km's to work versus ordering an uber via the supercomputer
in your pocket, moving overseas and needing to send letters or budget
for phone calls versus video chatting whenever at no extra cost and
writing a thesis with libraries and expensive books as resources versus
almost all documented work in human history available immediately
through the internet.

It's a life lived on an abstracted level, where we end up somewhere
without really knowing how we got there. I think that's also what
contributes to the feeling of the world moving "so fast". It has a lot
to do with being distracted by all the access we have, battling the
"paradox of choice" within so many facets of our lives. Social media is
great for this. By the time we've gotten through the current set of
choices, the world has shifted once again under our feet and no one
really has a good understanding of how or why. 

Nature is ever moving and evolving, it doesn't stop and wait for our
distracted selves to focus in again.
